Dr. Lewis and President Rutter and see what we can do.
So he called me back in a day and he said, well, we'll pay you $16,000.
And I said, that's fine.
I think that's more than generous.
But they doubled my salary, essentially.
I think I was making $8,500.
But anyway,
In the process of that, Burzell left here to become head of the department over at Mississippi State.
And when he left, then when I came back,
Gaines said, well, we want you to head up the cotton insect program and form a lab and the field work and you sort of head up that unit.
There was other, some other people in the department doing cotton work, but anyway, at that point then I could work on anything I wanted to and became sort of the point person for the research and also for,
working with the industry.
Where was your, where was the new lab that you used after that Quonset hut?
Where did you?
Well, the Quonset hut was still there, but I moved into the brick lab, which is still over there.
It's called Entomology Research Lab.
And I just had had an office in there, but I didn't have any space of my own.
That's the reason I moved out.
And then when I got back, they added 4,000 square feet to that lab, which was for me.
And I'm sure that was Mr. Rudder, well, Harry, but Mr. Rudder helped prove all that.
And so I guess in 1964, 65, I got a former student's award for research.
And Mr. Rudder... I got the teaching in 64.
Was it the same year?
Dr. Turk got one.
Well, John Capel was president of the former Students Association when I got there.
I believe that's 65.
That's 65.
I believe so.
Okay.
Randy Mattson had just, he sent me not long ago a copy of the Aggie in which it showed him about the shot puts, and then it had in that same issue the people who had won a
faculty, former student award, and I was in that group.
I think he was 65.
But anyway, as a result of going to Harvard, there was a lot of fallout because Carol Williams and I became very good friends.
We were collaborators and research for many years and he was a mentor.
And which means that throughout my career, I've had a Harvard connection.
And in higher education, they, it's opens a lot of doors.
and Carroll opened a lot of doors for me, and I would never have been elected to Academy of Sciences if it had not been for that because he, I'm sure he sponsored my nomination to the Academy, and so I was elected to the Academy of Sciences in 1979, which was
I guess that was a high point in my career.
I was the first person elected to the academy from Texas A&M.
And not that we hadn't had some academy members, but I was the first one as a bona fide A&M faculty member.
I can tell you that's not easy to do.
Would it be appropriate to guess that the team, you and he, that you were the real world applied and he was the theoretical?
Yeah, yeah.
He didn't have, he was not, you know, his interest was all in basic theoretical and basic research where I had to be concerned about controlling insects and cotton fields for farmers.
As you're making this rapid progress, did that cause any awkwardness for you in the department with your colleagues?
I don't think so.
I had good, really, I had good personal relationships with everybody in the department.
That's what I thought.
And I think they were proud of my accomplishments, what I did, and I thought, you know, any recognition I received brought some recognition to the department.
Dr. Gaines decided to retire in 1967.
Conkle called me and asked me if I would serve as acting department head.
And I said, I don't really want to do that.
If you want me to be department head, I'll be department head, but I don't really want to be acting department head.
So we talked about that some, and so he finally said, well, why don't you take it as acting and with provision that you'll be considered for department head, and the chances are you'll be the next department head.
So I said, well, okay, I'll do that.
And I'll also tell you there are some people, if they are made department head, I'm gone.
And there weren't people who were here, but there were some people that, you know, I'm not giving you an ultimatum, I'm just telling you the truth.
There are some people that are, I wouldn't work for, that are out there that would like to be here.
And if they come, I'm gone.
So he said, you don't have to worry about that.
But anyway, I did have to interview Mr. Rutter.
I don't know if he interviewed all the department heads or not, but... Please describe that interview.
Well... Because we don't, see, we don't know much about Mr. Rutter's personal management style.
Um...
I can't remember much about it, Haskell.
I can remember during that process I was doing a lot of work at Lubbock.
The boll weevil had just begun to threaten the High Plains area and we were, I had told the people in that area that I was working on an experimental program.
There was an experimental program that
Jim Berzell and myself and others have been working on, I thought might work to keep that weevil out of there, but it had never really been tested on large scale.
So they decided that they'd go with it.
So we implemented that program and under a lot of controversy at the beginning as whether it was going to work or not.
And I had spent three or four days a week in Lubbock during the growing season and trying to maintain a program here too.
And it was at a time that A&M and Texas Tech were having a lot of problems.
in the legislature over appropriations.
And there was no friendship between A&M and Texas Tech, particularly in the ag program among the administration.
But I had gotten along with people out there all right and said, you know, we ought to quit fighting with Texas Tech and us cooperate.
They can't, there's no way that they can compete with us in research, so we ought to just start cooperating with them.
But anyway, the Plains cotton growers gave me a certificate or a plaque of,
an award or distinguished achievement or something for all the work I'd done out there.
And they, they asked me and Kunkel to come to Lubbock where they could present that award and Harry went.
We just got the new King Air, the first new King Air and we flew out there.
Well, I think that was the most impressive thing with Rudder.
When we talked, he just sort of sized me up and he mentioned, he said, you know, that he was impressed that I had received an award from Plains cotton growers since they were so oriented to Texas Tech.
And I said to you, what I, to him, what I said to you is I think, you know, we ought to quit fighting them and cooperate with them and
We'd both gained by it, and he never asked me anything about my management style or anything, as I remember it didn't last very long.
Did it appear, as you recall, did it appear that he had reviewed your materials, that he knew a little?
Yeah, he knew quite a bit about
Because somewhere, you know, for a long time, when I'd be going into the administration building to go to the experiment station for Dr. Lewis or go see Roy Hagler or some of the people about projects and things, you'd pass him in the foyer and I'd always speak, but he didn't know who I was.
But when I went to Harvard and I got back, he knew who I was.
And he always called me Perry.
And so somewhere in that period of going to Harvard, he became aware of who I was, and he'd always call me by my first name.
And I didn't know him that well, and I stood in awe of him, you know, because here I am.
I'm 30-something years old and just starting a career.
But anyway, he approved it, and so I became department head in 1967.
And at that time, the department was fairly small.
It was like the rest of A&M.
It was regional and outlook and regional in scope.
Were you all doing degrees at all three levels?
Yeah.
We were given Ph.D.s when I, when I, I think the first Ph.D.
was granted Dr. Little, who was a professor here in 1945 or something in entomology.
So they'd given quite a few Ph.D.
degrees.
Now other than your research, particularly related to cotton, what were the other major research efforts then in the Department of Entomology as you became department head?
Well, we had Neil Randolph handle forage crops, feeding forage crops, sorghum, alfalfa range, and Manny Price was doing work on livestock, and Donald King was working on fruit tree crops, and Lynn Hannah and Knox Walker were working on cotton and myself, and
Shortly, well before I became department head, we hired a toxicologist named Wyman Durer.
But the scope of the department was pretty narrow and pretty limited.
Did you have, as you became department head, did you identify personally some goals for the department that you wanted?
Became department head at the right time.
I came to Texas A&M at the right time.
You see, a lot of things were going on in science when I, it was not long after I got here, the Russians shot Sputnik, Sputnik.
And Kennedy became president.
And then the budgets for the National Science Foundation and money for research became much more available.
John Connolly became governor.
double the salaries of everybody around here in this term, you know.
And so if you talk about hitting the place at the right time, I came to the right time.
I don't think I could have accomplished, now I couldn't do what I did then.
I couldn't have done what I did back then because a different kind of faculty is much more competitive.
At the time, shortly after I became department head, I began to talk.
I said, you know, we've got to change the way of doing business in crop protection because we're too dependent on chemicals.
Insects are getting resistant to all of them.
We're having all kinds of environmental problems now coming apparent.
And if we're going to maintain our productivity,
in the state, we've got to change.
And some of the insects had become so resistant to the chemicals, they were just destroying the cotton industry in South Texas.
So I had good support of the cotton growers who had become well organized.
And so we developed a statewide plan for insect control major crops.
And I took this plan to the growers and said, you know, here's what we need to do.
But we can't do it without positions and support.
I mean, the people we've got here in the department have so much teaching, they can't do it.
They can't teach all the courses and we, it's too big a problem.
So I was able during that time to,
Gained support and we got legislative support and created about 30 positions.
Who were the key people in the legislature that supported that?
Well, Hobby was Lieutenant Governor.
Billy Clayton was Speaker of the House.
And we had good support, particularly from Billy and Hobby.
What about local, did the local delegation... Well, we had good support from Bill Presnell, who was chairman of the Appropriations Committee, and Bill Moore was in the Senate in a good place, and then he was followed by Kent Caperton, and we had good support from
the rural legislators, but I met Barbara Jordan during that period.
And we had a session over banning DDT in 19, about 1972.
There was a move by people in the urban areas wanted to ban DDT.
And they were, they organized.
I mean, they had organized groups, mostly young women.
And they marched on the Capitol.
And I remember that we were put together this plan for what we call a statewide pest management plan, it's integrated pest management, which I was touting.
And I was in the Capitol and Barbara Jordan sent word she wanted to talk to me.
And I was there with a bunch of farmers who were trying to get money appropriated for hearings.
So I went to see her.
She's now a senator at this point.
She's a state senator.
Well, I went into the office and I had never met her.
I'd just seen her picture and stuff and knew a little bit about her when reading the Houston Chronicle, but I'd never met Barbara Jordan.
And she was a large black woman, very impressive.
And she said to me, Dr. Atkinson, I want you to sit down here and explain to me what you're trying to do, that I've had a lot of people
from Houston and Dallas coming through my office wanting us to ban these pesticides.
And I said, what I'm really concerned about is what effect that might have on the price of food in the fifth ward of Houston.
I think it was fifth ward that I represent.
So, so I said, well, that what I'm trying to get support to do is change the way we're doing crop protection that we can't do without pesticides, but we can sure use them in a much better way and that we can't just continue the way we've been going.
And Texas was just complete dependence on chemicals.
And the chemical company people were fighting me.
They had a very strong lobby.
And I said, you know, I've had people trying to get my job.
They've been to the dean and to the director and said, you know, this guy's got to go.
But they haven't got my job and they're not going to get him.
Because what I'm doing, the farmers are for, and in fact, the people, they're meeting with these anti-pesticide people, and they're going to come to a common ground.
And what we're going to try to do is going to be opposed by the chemical companies, in my opinion.
So she said, you've got my support.
So that was my meeting with Barbara Jordan, but I remembered it.
Did you run into any diehard opponents?
Oh, we didn't have much of a problem in the legislature.
We had some problems fostered by the National Cotton Council and some of the chemical companies, some of our own graduates in the chemical companies that thought we were going to
too far the other way.
Now, by the time you finished, was Conley gone?
Was there a different governor?
Yeah, let's see.
Yeah, Conley was – this was in the – about in the early 70s, and I don't know –
Dolph Briscoe was governor.
Okay.
Yeah.
So he would.
He would understand.
Yeah.
He was very supportive and that's where I met Dolph Briscoe and we've been friends ever since.
But in the process, we said to the legislature, we want to do this in stages.
So we want to do stage one.
And if it works, we'll come back and report on it and show you the results.
And if it does, then we'd like to move on stage two.
And the big problem first stage is in cotton, but we got similar problems in peanuts and citrus and sorghum, all our major crops.
And we've got to do something about them.
But in the process then, I had an opportunity to recast the department.
And so, again, I didn't have to deal with faculty search committees and all that.
What I had to deal with was build a consensus.
So I said to the senior members of the department, that's Neil Randolph and Manning Price and Horace Burke, they're all A&M graduates, guys, we got a chance now to make an entomology department at A&M that would be as good as any in the country.
And what I would propose to do
is let's go hire some of the best graduates out of some of the best departments in the country.
Now who, where were those best departments?
Well, University of California at Berkeley, University of California at Riverside, Cornell, Michigan State, Illinois,
places like that.
So I said, what we need to do is let's identify, we all know who the top people are in the field.
So let's, I want to go to those people.
I know them.
I want to go to their lab and visit with them and tell them we're going to have openings coming open and I want their best graduate student.
I want you to,
And I don't care whether he's getting a degree now or whether he got one in the previous three or four years.
Because if he's just gotten out in two or three years, fine.
That'd be fine.
If he get past five years, he probably can't afford him.
But that's what we want to do.
And we want your university to have a presence in Texas A&M.
We want to diversify.
Everybody said, you know, that's a good game plan.
Let's identify the universities where we need to have, where we'd like to have somebody from there on our faculty so we can send students there.
And the one problem we've had here at A&M, Haskell, when I came until recent years, at least in agriculture, and I think it's true across the board, we weren't able to put graduates in faculty positions.
Now we put a lot of our graduates in the USDA, but we didn't have any faculty members at Cornell or Michigan or the number one schools, and as a result,
You can say, well, A&M's got a pedestrian product that we don't, you know, they're not well-rounded and they're not well-trained.
And so, you know, we can't, the only way we're going to break that is we've got to bring in some of the best students from those places and we'll start the pipeline.
And then eventually we'll be putting faculty members out.
in a lot of universities, which has happened.
That prophecy has come true.
So we had good budget support.
We got some new facilities, got this new building here.
And this dream begins in the 70s, early 70s?
Well, it began in 67 when I became department head.
Okay.
But this, this... But I didn't have the means to do it until in the early 70s.
That's what I was meaning.
Yeah.
You began to have... Okay.
So I visited lots of departments as department head.
And I...
That's my pocket organizer.
I've carried one of these little books from, it used to be Seba Geige.
And every time, and I was given quite a few invitational lectures at the time, but every time I went to a university, and after a lecture or something, we met and talked with students.
If somebody really impressed me,
I'd write his name down or her name down and think, well, if we get a position this year or next year, that's somebody we'll want to think about.
So I was out cherry picking.
And as a result, we hired, all told, I think we had about
30 some positions, but about half of them were in extension out in the centers.
So I was able to cherry pick for here.
Now the center is a little different story.
It's hard to get people to come to Texas to stay in the center.
I've been at the center and I know what the problems are.
They're really good.
They won't stay long.
You're going to go to the campus.
So I found out after one or two failures where I hired somebody that came and just get a program started and you spend a lot of money on them and then they're gone.
That's where you need to hire your Texas A&M graduates, your good ones.
put them in, so I hired several of them at the center and then some of them eventually ended up here on the faculty because they were quite good.
But as a result of that, we hired probably 15 or so really top flight young PhDs who are now senior professors here in Early Air
Well, one of them's dean at the University of Missouri now, but one or two left for better administrative jobs.
But a big part of them are still here as senior professors, and they've done really well there.
I mean, A&M's entomology department is well-respected, and it's well-diversified.
I mean, we're in basic research.
We're in bowel control.
We're in chemical control.
We're in all aspects.
And I'm assuming that
the research budget would show a nice increase during that same period.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, we got quite a bit of state support, but as a result of that and the fact we had some really bright people come in, then they were competitive on us.
national scene and they began to get money on the National Science Foundation and competitive grant program, USDA competitive grants.
So when I left the Department of Entomology, they had the largest grant budget, I think, of any department in the university maybe, but certainly in the College of Agriculture.
Now when did you leave the department?
Well, I became vice president for agriculture, Jarvis Miller and Mike Prescott, on April Fool's Day, 1978.
And after a considerable conversation with Jarvis, I didn't really want to do that.
But anyway, I did, and after about six months of talking.
So you were department head for?
From 1967 to 1978.
When did you begin, are there some events
during that period when you could see that here was clear evidence of progress?
Were there some research grants or national honors?
Well, let me put it in a little broader context.
When I came to Texas A&M, I don't know when you came.
59.
All right, we came here at the same time.
I don't know what you, what your perspective was, but I found A&M to be a, what I would call a regional Cal College, very parochial.
I don't think it's as good a university as University of Arkansas.
They didn't tolerate people who thought beyond the envelope.
They didn't tolerate unconventional wisdom very well.
And it was just a small university and it was mostly known for the core.
And we didn't have many faculty members.
They were all nice people and they were good teachers.
But I don't think we had many that would be considered very distinguished at the national level or international level.
And I say that one of the things that Mr. Rudder did was break that.
He began to look for the best people.
Now, and John Calhoun, I think, helped him in that a lot.
But when I started even in 1968 of trying to hire people from California or Cornell, I had people in the faculty say, well, Perry, we can't hire those people.
And I said, well, let's let them make that decision.
Let's don't make it far.
Let's bring them here and let them make that decision.
Well, I think Mr.